SIMD-0391: Stake Program Float to Fixed-Point (#391)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/0391-replace-stake-program-floating-point.md

   equivalence for its migration.

## Requirements

The new implementation must be a replacement that precisely models the
intent of the original logic. Any resulting differences in output
should be minor and a direct result of improved numerical precision.

## New Terminology

None

## Detailed Design

### Proposed Fixed-Point Implementation

This proposal replaces `f64` with _rational arithmetic_, expressing
the `warmup_cooldown_rate` as a fraction and reordering operations to
preserve precision while using integer arithmetic.

- The floating-point rates will be converted to their fractional
  equivalents:
  - `DEFAULT_WARMUP_COOLDOWN_RATE` (`0.25`) becomes a fraction of
    **(numerator: 1, denominator: 4)**.
  - `NEW_WARMUP_COOLDOWN_RATE` (`0.09`) becomes a fraction of
    **(numerator: 9, denominator: 100)**.

- The current flow
  `(account_portion / cluster_portion) * (cluster_effective * rate)` is
  reordered to
  `(account_portion * cluster_effective * rate_numerator) / (cluster_portion * rate_denominator)`.
  Instead of performing divisions early in the process (which truncates
  intermediate results), all multiplications are performed first.

> - All intermediate multiplications are performed using `u128` to

Reviewer: Similar to f64, u128 is also not supported by upstream BPF at this time. We can roll our own u128 math, replace it with a fast jit intrinsic mapping to a syscall, or several other fairly trivial workarounds, but if your calculation can reasonably fit into a u64, consider simply not making the numerator stupidly large.

Author: Given the intermediate products could risk an overflow, think the temp upscaling is necessary. I was under the assumption that u128 support was quite likely to be upstreamed (maybe @Lichtso has some thoughts though). Otherwise, looks like the [uint crate](https://crates.io/crates/uint) could be useful here.

Reviewer 2: > u128 support was quite likely to be upstreamed

There are multiple aspects to this: Being able to pass around and return `u128` etc., which could be upstreamed. And then there are u64 x u64 = u128 multiplications which are unlikely to be upstreamed.

So, in this specific case I would agree with @deanmlittle on trying to avoid the extra wide multiplications here.

  prevent overflow.

### State Compatibility

To maintain backwards compatibility with on-chain stake account data,
the `Delegation` struct will be modified:

```diff
pub struct Delegation {
    pub voter_pubkey: Pubkey,
    pub stake: u64,
    pub activation_epoch: Epoch,
    pub deactivation_epoch: Epoch,
-   pub warmup_cooldown_rate: f64,
+    _reserved: [u8; 8],
}
```

This preserves the exact memory size and layout of existing accounts.
It is a legacy field anyway, with the actual rate being determined
dynamically in functions.

## Alternatives Considered

> Decimal scaling factor. Uses a uniform scaling factor represent rates

Reviewer: this is a fine idea so long as precision is sufficient imo.

as integers like BPS (e.g 0.25 = 2500). Rejected as rational
arithmetic is more precise. It may be easier to use for external
consumers, but these values are really only used internally to the
stake interface crate.

## Impact

- **Stake Program:** The program must be updated to use the new
  integer-based calculation helpers from `solana-stake-interface`. It is
  doing so mostly through its use of
  `stake.delegation.stake_activating_and_deactivating()`. Also, the new
  `Delegation` struct definition (with its private field), will likely
  impact how its being instantiated in a few areas.

- **Agave:** Update the workspace dependency on
  `solana-stake-interface`. Runtime stake processing already funnels
  through Delegation::stake_activating_and_deactivating, so a dependency
  bump automatically picks up the fixed-point math without touching
  Agave code.

- **Firedancer:** Will also need to update their stake interface

>   dependency in lockstep with Agave.

Reviewer 3: Firedancer uses their own implementation of everything, so they'll need to implement the logic outlined in the previous section

## Security Considerations

1. **Unit tests:** Baseline of correctness by testing specific, known
   scenarios and edge cases.
2. **Differential Fuzzing (`proptest`):**
   - An oracle function preserving the original `f64` logic will be
     maintained for testing purposes only.
   - The test will run the new integer implementation against the oracle
     with millions of random inputs.
   - Assert that the results are within a relative tolerance to account

>      for the increased precision.

Reviewer 3: This is a bit vague. What is this tolerance supposed to be?

The exact difference will depend on the size of the stake and the amount on mainnet-beta, or even better, give examples of how different the calculation can be for small and large stake accounts.

But since we're essentially widening out the calculation to 128 bits instead of 64, the new calculation should only diverge past ~52 bits?

Either way, since the calculation is more accurate, this should actually give people *higher* amounts of activation / deactivation, correct?

## Detailed Design

### Rate representation (basis points)

The current network warmup/cooldown rate is 9%. This means that, in any given
epoch, at most 9% of the previous epoch's effective stake can be activated or
deactivated.

Currently, this figure is represented in floating-point: `0.09`. The new
representation is an integer of basis points: `900`.

### Maintaining precision

The original float logic computes:

```text
RATE_FLOAT = 0.09

allowed_change = (account_portion / cluster_portion) * (cluster_effective * RATE_FLOAT)
```

For an integer implementation, it's important to re-arrange the formula so
that the division happens last to maintain the highest precision. This is
achieved via an algebraically equivalent re-ordering:

```text
BASIS_POINTS_PER_UNIT = 10_000
RATE_BPS = 900

allowed_change =
    (account_portion * cluster_effective * RATE_BPS) /
    (cluster_portion * BASIS_POINTS_PER_UNIT)
```

Note: The division uses unsigned integer division so it truncates (rounds down).

#### Widening arithmetic to 128-bit integers

All inputs are unsigned 64-bit lamport quantities. Because of the extra
multiplication, all values used in the formula should be widened to unsigned

> 128-bit integers (or an exact emulation). The final value should then be cast

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
multiplication, all values used in the formula MUST be widened to unsigned
128-bit integers (or an exact emulation). The final value MUST then be cast
```

we're under consensus. we can't be offering suggestions. see [rfc2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119). make any similar changes throughout

```text
BASIS_POINTS_PER_UNIT = 10_000
RATE_BPS = 900

allowed_change =
    (account_portion * cluster_effective * RATE_BPS) /
    (cluster_portion * BASIS_POINTS_PER_UNIT)
```

Note: any truncation in the division that occurs should truncate toward zero.

#### Widening arithmetic to 128-bit integers

Because of the extra multiplication, 64-bit integer math is not sufficient for
safety. For that reason, all values used in the formula should be widened to
128-bit integers. The final value should then be cast back down to a 64-bit
integer.

Implementations that do not offer native unsigned 128-bit arithmetic must
emulate it (for example via fixed-width limb arithmetic).

#### Saturation and fail-safe behavior

If the intermediate multiplication overflows the maximum representable
unsigned 128-bit value, the numerator saturates to the maximum 128-bit value
before division. The result is then clamped to `account_portion`. This ensures
that overflow cannot amplify a stake change beyond the account's own portion
(fail-safe rather than fail-open).

### Minimum progress clamp

Currently, when `account_portion > 0`, there is a granted minimum change of 1

> lamport per epoch so that small delegations do not get stuck in activating/

Author: These are two different mechanisms:

- Warmup/cooldown (related to this SIMD) uses a .max(1) clamp to prevent tiny delegations from never activating/deactivating: [state.rs reference](https://github.com/solana-program/stake/blob/0e030308c9091a706070f2eef9fe062b42169d1f/interface/src/state.rs#L669-L670).
- Rewards (not covered by this SIMD) uses the deferral behavior you are referencing [inflation_rewards/mod.rs](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/d34495da06e37442bc0b8aaa7515a92db1217116/runtime/src/inflation_rewards/mod.rs#L195-L200) so sub-lamport rewards won't update `credits_observed`. 

I'll add a specific note to this SIMD about this to clarify the distinction.

aligning with upstream standards requires removing all floating-point usage
from the program.

The validator client shares the same warmup/cooldown calculation logic with
the on-chain program, so it is also in need of a lock-step update to stay in
sync.

## New Terminology

- **Basis points (bps)**: An integer representation of a percentage where
  `bps = percent × 100`.
    - 1 bps = 0.01%
    - 1% = 100 bps

- Formula variables
    - **account_portion**: The amount of stake (in lamports) for a single
      account that is eligible to warm up or cool down in a given epoch.
    - **cluster_portion**: The total amount of stake (in lamports) across the
      cluster that is in the same warmup/cooldown phase as `account_portion`
      for the previous epoch.
    - **cluster_effective**: The total effective stake in the cluster (in
      lamports) for the previous epoch.

## Detailed Design

### Rate representation (basis points)

The current network warmup/cooldown rate is 9%. This means that, in any given
epoch, at most 9% of the previous epoch's effective stake can be activated or
deactivated.

Currently, this figure is represented in floating-point: `0.09`. The new

> representation is an integer of basis points: `900`.

Author: Originally I had a section about this, but was requested to remove it due to irrelevance as that field is deprecated and continues to be: https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/391#discussion_r2637980719

    if allowed_change > account_portion:
        allowed_change = account_portion

    # Minimum progress clamp
    if allowed_change == 0:
        return 1

    return allowed_change
```

#### Proposed new implementation

```text
BASIS_POINTS_PER_UNIT = 10_000
RATE_BPS = 900

# All params are unsigned 64-bit integers
function rate_limited_stake_change(account_portion, cluster_portion, cluster_effective):
    if account_portion == 0 or cluster_portion == 0 or cluster_effective == 0:
        return 0

    # Cast all params to unsigned 128-bit integer
    # All multiplications saturate
    numerator = account_portion_128 * cluster_effective_128 * RATE_BPS_128

    denominator = cluster_portion_128 * BASIS_POINTS_PER_UNIT_128

    allowed_change_128 = numerator / denominator

    # Never allow more than the account's own portion to change
    if allowed_change_128 > account_portion_128:
        allowed_change_128 = account_portion_128

    # Narrow back to unsigned 64-bit integer
    allowed_change = allowed_change_128 as unsigned 64-bit integer

    # Minimum progress clamp
    if allowed_change == 0:
        return 1

    return allowed_change

> ```

Reviewer 5: Can we use sat_mul_128 functions here? To make it clear that we are using saturating multiplication as described above.
